README.md, before:

# Otto

Otto is a Rust IMAP syncer for Gmail. It authorizes with OAuth2, opens one IMAP connection per folder, and keeps a local SQLite cache of messages and sanitized bodies. Each run skips work when MODSEQ matches; otherwise it fetches only new UIDs and updates flags, parsing messages in parallel and writing in batches.

On startup the CLI loads accounts from SQLite (or onboards one), runs the sync unless `--no-sync`, and prints a small inbox preview from the cache. Messages are keyed by stable Gmail ids (`X-GM-MSGID`) so moves avoid duplicates; expunges still need QRESYNC/VANISHED to be tracked.

## Features

- Incremental IMAP sync via CONDSTORE/MODSEQ
- Parallel folder syncing and MIME parsing
- Local SQLite cache with sanitized plaintext bodies
- OAuth2 with token refresh
- Batched database writes

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Rust toolchain (1.70+)
- Google OAuth credentials ([get them here](https://console.cloud.google.com/apis/credentials))

### Setup

1. **Clone and build**:

```bash
git clone <repo>
cd Otto
cargo build --release
```

2. **Add Google OAuth credentials**:
   - Download OAuth client secret JSON from Google Cloud Console
   - Place it in the Otto directory as `client_secret_*.json`

3. **First run** (onboarding):

```bash
cargo run --release
```

- Opens browser for Google OAuth consent
- Prompts for folders to sync and cutoff date
- Performs initial sync

4. **Subsequent syncs**:

```bash
cargo run --release
```

- Displays latest 10 emails from cache
- Syncs new messages since last run

## Usage

```bash
# Normal sync (default)
cargo run --release

# Add another account
cargo run --release -- --add-account

# Skip sync, show cache only
cargo run --release -- --no-sync

# With debug logging
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run --release
```

## How It Works

- `SELECT (CONDSTORE)` to read `HIGHESTMODSEQ` and `UIDVALIDITY`.
- If MODSEQ unchanged and `--force` not set → skip.
- No baseline: `UID SEARCH SINCE <cutoff>` then fetch new UIDs.
- With baseline: `UID SEARCH SINCE <cutoff> MODSEQ <stored+1>`; fetch bodies for new UIDs and flags for existing.
- Update folder state and store sanitized content in SQLite.

### Performance

- **No changes**: ~300-600ms (just checks MODSEQ, skips sync)
- **With 50 new messages**: ~2-5 seconds (fetch + parse + store)

## Architecture

See [architecture.md](architecture.md) for detailed documentation including:

- Module breakdown and function descriptions
- Database schema with examples
- Data flow diagrams
- Design decisions and trade-offs

## TODO

See [TODO.md](TODO.md) for:

- Outstanding issues and bugs
- Planned features (IDLE, attachment extraction, TUI)
- Performance improvements
- Future enhancements

## Database Location

- Linux/macOS: `~/otto/otto.db`
- Windows: `%USERPROFILE%\otto\otto.db`

## Tech Stack

- **Language**: Rust (async with Tokio)
- **IMAP**: `async-imap` with TLS (`tokio-rustls`)
- **Database**: SQLite (`sqlx`)
- **Auth**: `oauth2` + OS keyring
- **Parsing**: `mailparse` + `rayon` for parallelism
- **Sanitization**: `html2text` for HTML→text conversion

## Project Structure

```
Otto/
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs           # Entry point
│   ├── app.rs            # Command routing
│   ├── cli.rs            # CLI arguments
│   ├── oauth.rs          # OAuth flow
│   ├── onboarding.rs     # Account setup
│   ├── imap/             # IMAP connection
│   ├── sync/             # Sync engine
│   ├── sanitize/         # MIME parsing
│   └── storage/          # SQLite database
├── architecture.md       # Detailed documentation
├── TODO.md              # Outstanding tasks
└── README.md            # This file
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Implement Now: uidvalidity reset, expunge fallback, mime/labels

README.md, after:

# Otto

Otto is a Rust IMAP syncer for Gmail. It authorizes with OAuth2, opens one IMAP connection per folder, and keeps a local SQLite cache of messages and sanitized bodies. Each run skips work when MODSEQ/EXISTS match; otherwise it fetches only new UIDs and updates flags/labels, parsing messages in parallel and writing in batches.

On startup the CLI loads accounts from SQLite (or onboards one), runs the sync unless `--no-sync`, and prints a small inbox preview from the cache. Messages are keyed by stable Gmail ids (`X-GM-MSGID`) so moves avoid duplicates; expunges are handled via a periodic UID scan fallback (QRESYNC/VANISHED is not implemented).

## Features

- Incremental IMAP sync via CONDSTORE/MODSEQ
- Parallel folder syncing and MIME parsing
- Local SQLite cache with sanitized plaintext bodies
- OAuth2 with token refresh
- Batched database writes

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Rust toolchain (1.70+)
- Google OAuth credentials ([get them here](https://console.cloud.google.com/apis/credentials))

### Setup

1. **Clone and build**:

```bash
git clone <repo>
cd Otto
cargo build --release
```

2. **Add Google OAuth credentials**:
   - Download OAuth client secret JSON from Google Cloud Console
   - Place it in the Otto directory as `client_secret_*.json`

3. **First run** (onboarding):

```bash
cargo run --release
```

- Opens browser for Google OAuth consent
- Prompts for folders to sync and cutoff date
- Performs initial sync

4. **Subsequent syncs**:

```bash
cargo run --release
```

- Displays latest 10 emails from cache
- Syncs new messages since last run

## Usage

```bash
# Normal sync (default)
cargo run --release

# Add another account
cargo run --release -- --add-account

# Skip sync, show cache only
cargo run --release -- --no-sync

# With debug logging
RUST_LOG=debug cargo run --release
```

## How It Works

- `SELECT (CONDSTORE)` to read `HIGHESTMODSEQ` and `UIDVALIDITY`.
- If MODSEQ unchanged and `--force` not set → skip.
- No baseline: `UID SEARCH SINCE <cutoff>` then fetch new UIDs.
- With baseline: `UID SEARCH SINCE <cutoff> MODSEQ <stored+1>`; fetch bodies for new UIDs and flags for existing.
- Update folder state and store sanitized content in SQLite.

### Performance

- **No changes**: ~300-600ms (just checks MODSEQ, skips sync)
- **With 50 new messages**: ~2-5 seconds (fetch + parse + store)

## Architecture

See [architecture.md](architecture.md) for detailed documentation including:

- Module breakdown and function descriptions
- Database schema with examples
- Data flow diagrams
- Design decisions and trade-offs

## TODO

See [TODO.md](TODO.md) for:

- Outstanding issues and bugs
- Planned features (IDLE, attachment extraction, TUI)
- Performance improvements
- Future enhancements

## Database Location

- Linux/macOS: `~/otto/otto.db`
- Windows: `%USERPROFILE%\otto\otto.db`

## Tech Stack

- **Language**: Rust (async with Tokio)
- **IMAP**: `async-imap` with TLS (`tokio-rustls`)
- **Database**: SQLite (`sqlx`)
- **Auth**: `oauth2` + OS keyring
- **Parsing**: `mailparse` + `rayon` for parallelism
- **Sanitization**: `html2text` for HTML→text conversion

## Project Structure

```
Otto/
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs           # Entry point
│   ├── app.rs            # Command routing
│   ├── cli.rs            # CLI arguments
│   ├── oauth.rs          # OAuth flow
│   ├── onboarding.rs     # Account setup
│   ├── imap/             # IMAP connection
│   ├── sync/             # Sync engine
│   ├── sanitize/         # MIME parsing
│   └── storage/          # SQLite database
├── architecture.md       # Detailed documentation
├── TODO.md              # Outstanding tasks
└── README.md            # This file
```

## License

MIT
